# Protecting the Bat Population
Com”BAT”ing White-Nose Syndrome

### Project Statement
Bats are a vital part of ecosystems and have been on the decline due to one of the worst wildlife diseases in modern history, white nose syndrome. Sewanee Bat Study has collected years of data on the behavior and habitats of local cave-dwelling bat species. We are analyzing the data and creating a dashboard to help make better data-driven forest management decisions that will help control the spread of white nose syndrome.


### Summary of Our Project
Bats are vital to our ecosystem. They serve as pollinators, seed dispersers, and a form of pest control for nighttime insects. They also are the primary pollinators for agave plants that Tequila is produced from.
Sewanee is known for its beautiful 13,000-acre domain and is not only home to us but also to many creatures including bats. Bat populations are declining due to a fungal disease called White Nose Syndrome. In efforts to understand what areas to prioritize for conservation we are collaborating with Dr.Turner’s Team. 
Our bats are clearly in danger. Sewanee has massive amounts of data spanning across 6 years, but no way to digest it. So, Dr. Turner has invited us to help organize the data to… 
1. Monitor Trends in Bats over time, 
2. Ask Which Forest Management Practices are Best for Bats, and 
3. Allocate Resources Accordingly.

Questions Dr. Turner is asking include, “Which domain management areas are the most vital?”  “What parts of our domain are most vulnerable to WNS?” She has the skills to answer these questions but lacks a tool to do so. Our project serves as this tool for the conservation effort necessary for the survival of Sewanee’s bats. The goal is to create an interactive dashboard that will not only help Dr. Turner in the present, but in the future as well. Completing this dashboard will also pave the way for deeper research to continue.  
In order to perform this function for Dr. Turner, we will need work with the vast amounts of data already collected, and also provide for any future additions. So, our first order of business will be to create a system that automatically incorporates the current files to create a single data set, and updates as new data is added. This will aid in the ongoing research by Dr. Turner both now and in the future, since it won’t need to be done by hand. Such a system may even be adapted to places beyond Sewanee involved in similar efforts.
Once the data is compiled, our task is to explore and analyze all the key trends: namely, the bat population trends over time and across locations. By connecting the populations and locations to the ecological management strategies used in each area, we aim to determine which will be most effective for future conservation efforts.
The final step is to communicate this information gathered by Dr. Turner to the public. To accomplish this, we will construct an interactive online dashboard to display the trends we discover, and enable visitors to explore the data and visualize trends of their own. By employing the automated data integration process previously mentioned, the dashboard will automatically update to reflect new data as it is collected, allowing it to keep pace with Dr. Turner’s research as it continues into the future.
So, Shark, while we aren’t asking for monetary assistance, we do ask for your support in our endeavor to do social and ecological good. 


### Brief Pitch
I’m working with a team creating an online dashboard to visualize trends in Sewanee’s bat activity over time and across locations with different management strategies. You see, bat populations have actually been declining due to threats like white-nose disease and climate change, which is a problem, because they are big pollinators and help control insects, along with contributing to biodiversity. To address this, Dr. Amy Turner has been conducting research for the past six years, and has asked us to help her analyze and visualize that data to better focus her efforts. This is why we are creating the dashboard: it will allow us to explore and display what areas are important for conservation, and whether or not areas under management are doing better. We also plan to make an automated data integration system, so any new data collected by the team can easily be added and explored - they won’t have to do it by hand. The site will even be available to the public, so anyone who is interested can see the results of Dr. Turner’s work and explore the data for themselves.


### From Our Client's Perspective
I am Dr. Amy Turner, and I’m the Director of Environmental Stewardship and Sustainability here at Sewanee University. I have an extensive background in Environmental Conservation. For the past six years, my team and I have focused our efforts on Sewanee’s bat populations. About a decade ago, a fungal infection by the name of white-nose syndrome was brought into the U.S. and has caused around 6 million bat deaths in the present day.
My overall goal is to eradicate the effect that white-nose syndrome has had on Sewanee’s bats, but a lot of work must be done before this is accomplished. The hardest part thus far has been finding a launching point. There have been attempts to understand our data thus far, but nothing as large scale as what we hope to do this summer. I want an interactive dashboard that displays all viable data collected so far as well as anything my team documents in the future.
The data we have comes from several sensors that the OESS has placed anywhere we think may be important for the bats. The sensors are built to record specific bat calls, like a feeding call. Based on this data, we want to see if there are any trends in the data regarding species frequencies and activity across time and location. Our short-term goal with this is to determine which areas are crucial for the bats and change forest management plans accordingly. Additionally, we would like to check for any dramatic decrease in appearances for the species of bats most affected by white-nose syndrome.
Long-term goals include using the dashboard to continue logging data from our field research and strategizing based on the results. A key factor that hasn’t seen intense analysis would be how weather patterns affect how a bat interacts with its environment, especially recently as climate change evolves. There are multiple aspects of forest management that could be affecting where bats choose to roam, such as if an area has been burnt recently or not.
Overall, my team and I have done immense preparation for a plan to help Sewanee’s bats, we just need to put it into action.

